# Introduction

Fuzzcheck is a crate to easily find bugs in Rust code. Given a test function:
```rust ignore
fn test_always_true(x: SomeType) -> bool {
    // ...
}
```
You can use fuzzcheck to find a value `x: SomeType` that causes `test_always_true(x)` to return false or crash 💥.

Technically, it is called an evolutionary, structure-aware fuzzing engine. It is coverage-guided by default,
but can also use other observations to guide the evolution of the fuzz test.

## Goal 🦄

Fuzzcheck’s goal is to be used as part of your development routine. You can quickly test small or complex 
function with it. It can find difficult corner-case bugs, minify complex test cases into easy-to-debug ones. 
It can find stack overflows and inputs that cause excessive computations or allocations. 

Over time, by using fuzzcheck, you can automatically build a large corpus of values that trigger most 
edge cases in your code. This will help ensure that no new bugs are introduced when refactoring.

## Requirements 🎟

Currently, it is only possible to use fuzzcheck on Linux and macOS. I'd like to add Windows support to it, and
it shouldn't be complicated, but [I need some help with it](https://github.com/loiclec/fuzzcheck-rs/issues/8).

You also need a nightly version of the Rust compiler. This requirement is unlikely to change soon.

## Design ⚙️

Fuzzcheck works by repeatedly running the test function `test_always_true(x)` with automatically generated 
values for `x`. For each invocation of `test_always_true(x)`, it gathers observations about the code 
that was run and determines whether new observations were discovered. This enables it to build a list of values 
that are known to be interesting to test, which we call the “pool of interesting values”.

Then, fuzzcheck repeatedly draws values from that pool, slightly mutates them, and then feeds them to 
`test_always_true` again. It continues this process indefinitely, analysing the observations (e.g. code coverage) 
triggered by each test case in order to discover more and more interesting values to test.

Thus, fuzzcheck is composed of three components working together:
* a `Mutator<T>`, which can generate arbitrary values of type `T`, either from scratch or starting from a
known interesting value.
* a `Sensor`, whose role is to gather observations about the execution of a test function. By default, this uses
the code coverage information generated by the `-C instrument-coverage` option of the Rust compiler. But different 
kinds of observations can be used.
* a `Pool`, which listens to the observations from the `Sensor` and determines which values are interesting
to test. It internally ranks the different values that were tested and ensures that the most interesting ones
are mutated and re-tested more often.

In pseudo-code:
```rust ignore
loop {
    let value = pool.get_mut();
    mutator.mutate(value);
    let observations = sensor.record(|| {
        test_function(value);
    });
    if pool.is_interesting(value, observations) {
        pool.add(value, observations);
    }
}
```

## Example 👀

We can illustrate fuzzcheck’s strengths with a simple but unrealistic example. What follows are not instructions
to use fuzzcheck (these start from the next section), but rather an example showing how fuzzcheck is different from
other testing tools such as `quickcheck` or `proptest`. Imagine we have the following function:

```rust ignore
fn this_should_always_succeed(xs: &[u8]) -> bool {
    if xs.len() >= 4 && xs[0] == 96 && xs[1] == 1 && xs[2] < 78 && xs[3] == 189 {
        false
    } else {
        true
    }
}
```

We can find a vector of bytes that makes the function fail by running the following test:
```rust ignore
#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    #[test]
    fn fuzz_test() {
        let result = fuzzcheck::fuzz_test(super::this_should_always_succeed)
            .default_options()
            .stop_after_first_test_failure(true)
            .launch();
        assert!(!result.found_test_failure);
    }
}
```
We run:

```sh
cargo fuzzcheck tests::fuzz_test
```
which launches the fuzz test on the library target. Fuzzcheck progressively finds values which 
satisfy each condition inside `fn this_should_always_succeed` until, after about 2000 iterations, 
it prints:

```text
Failing test case found. 
Saving at "fuzz/artifacts/tests::fuzz_test/642e66bf463956ed.json"
```

It found the bug and serialized the failing test case to the file `42e66bf463956ed.json`, which contains:
```json
[96,1,24,189]
``` 
The time to find this bug, on my machine, was 12 milliseconds.

While this was a simplistic example, the same process can be used for large functions that take very complex 
input types as arguments. However, note that the test function should run fairly fast, ideally in 
less than a tenth of a millisecond.
